---
layout: post
title: "RC: W6 D3 — Why RocksDB is optimized for SSDs"
date: 2024-03-20
tags: [databases, lsm]
group: recurse_center
---

The first thing mentioned in the [RocksDB wiki](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/RocksDB-Overview) is that it
is optimized for Flash storage (i.e. the storage technology used by most SSDs) but they don't explain why specifically.
I have been wondering about that ever since I started working on my LSM, and I _think_ I understood one of the reasons
for that today and I thought I would thus share this.

To understand it, we need to understand how SSDs work.
The smallest write unit on SSDs is a page (which is 4 to 16KB long usually).
This means that every time we write anything (even if it is as small as one single byte), a full page gets written
(including many empty bytes).

When flushing memtables into SSTables blocks, all records are added into a buffer, and the block is written to disk only
once the buffer is full.
If we did not use a buffer and wrote all records one by one, there would obviously be many more I/O operations.
But on top of that, records would be scattered across multiple pages.
At some point, the SSD's garbage collector would need to erase all blocks containing those pages, and rewrite a new more
condensed page containing all of these records. This would mean higher write amplification (records need to be written
once and then re-written a second time to condense them).
This would also mean higher CPU usage for the garbage collector.
Instead, by first putting all records in a buffer, and flushing them to disk only once the block is full, we need only
one I/O operation and most importantly, the data is already condensed, thus preventing write amplification.

I am pretty sure there are some more optimizations linked to SSTables compaction. I will explain those when I get there!


