---
layout: post
title: "RC: W5 D3 — Merging iterators (part 2)"
date: 2024-03-13
tags: [databases, lsm]
group: recurse_center
---

My memtables rely on red-black trees, and I have implemented the latter such that, if I insert a record whose key is a
duplicate of another record in the tree, I replace it with the new value.
Therefore, I am guaranteed to never have any duplicates within the same memtable (here, by "duplicate", I mean "two
records that have the same key").

However, the records in one memtable may be duplicates of others located in a different memtable.
Thus, when merging iterators from multiple memtables, I need to make sure I return only the correct duplicate (i.e. the
most recently-inserted record).
In order to separate concerns, I created a second function whose responsibility would be to filter out the duplicates.
It can be implemented very simply: the first time it encounters a new key, it yields the record, and every duplicate
that shows up afterward is ignored.

```python
def filter_duplicates(iterator: Iterator[Record]) -> Iterator[Record]:
    previous_item = None
    for item in iterator:
        if previous_item is not None and item.is_duplicate(previous_item):
            continue
        yield item
        previous_item = item
```

The `filter_duplicates` function takes the merged iterator (containing duplicates) as input and returns an iterator
without duplicates.

To make sure this simple implementation is correct, I need to make sure that the first duplicate in the list is the most
recently-written one.
In other words, I need to make sure that the `merge_iterators` function implemented yesterday would yield them in this
order.
Given that my `merge_iterators` function uses a [`heapq`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/heapq.html) and that
iterators are passed in most to least recent order to it, I made a very simple experiment to check how duplicates are
inserted:

```python
import heapq


class Item:
    def __init__(self, key, id):
        self.key = key
        self.id = id

    def __lt__(self, other: "Item"):
        return self.key < other.key


heap = []
heapq.heappush(heap, Item("a", 1))
heapq.heappush(heap, Item("a", 3))
heapq.heappush(heap, Item("a", 2))

print([el.id for el in heap])  # [1, 3, 2]
```

Duplicates are indeed inserted after the first occurrence! This makes total sense since
Python's `heapq` is implemented as a binary tree according
to [their documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/heapq.html).

So everything is fine: I can now make sure I merge iterators and keep only the relevant record when there are
duplicates!
