---
layout: post
title: "RC: W3 D5 — Red-black trees"
date: 2024-03-01
categories: recurse_center, DMBS, storage_engine, LSM
group: recurse_center
---

Today, I started re-implementing a red-black tree as the in-memory component of my LSM storage engine.

I had already heard about red-black trees in the past, but had never quite taken the time to understand how they work.
After spending a day implementing one, I finally know what they are for, and that will be the topic for today's post.

Red-black trees are binary search trees with the extra property of self-balancing.
Being "self-balancing" means that it automatically re-balances upon insertion or deletion of a node.
Mathematically, if `n` is the number of nodes in the tree, its height will always a function of `log(n)`.
Visually, it means that the tree will always have roughly the same number of nodes on its right and left sides.

In red-black trees, all nodes have a color (red or black) and there are a few properties that must hold true. For
example: the root must be black, there cannot be two red nodes that are parent-child of one another, all leaf/nil nodes
(nodes that contain no data) are black and so on...
Whenever one such property is violated, the tree re-balances automatically.
What is nice with red-black trees is that there is a small number of scenarios describing the topology that can be
summarized solely based on the color of 4 nodes (one node, its parent, its grandparent and its uncle). Depending on the
scenario we are in, we can either "rotate" a node or recolor some, and the tree is balanced.

"Rotating" a node corresponds visually to doing the following:

```text
        Y                                X
       / \       Right-rotate 'X'       / \
      X   c     =================>     a   Y
     / \                                  / \
    a   b                                b   c
```

Here, `X` right rotates, and thus, `Y` which was its parent, now becomes its right child. The `b` node is also moved
from being `X`'s child to `Y`'s child. This is a bit tedious to explain with words, but the drawing speaks for itself.

In practice, when we insert a new node in a red-black tree, here is how we proceed:

- Insert it as in a regular binary search tree
- Check if properties are violated.
- If so, fix the properties by performing some rotations and/or recoloring nodes. 
