---
layout: post
title: "RC: W10 D5 — Creating a monotonically incrementing sequence number"
date: 2024-04-19
categories: recurse_center, DMBS, storage_engine, LSM
group: recurse_center
---

Today, I wanted to add a sequence number to each entry written to my engine.
Those sequence numbers will later be used to create snapshots of the database (i.e. a stable view of the database at a
particular point in time) and thus need to be monotonically increasing.
So I implemented a `SequenceNumberGenerator` to yield values incrementing by 1 every time it is called.
To add the sequence number to each record, I thus did the following:

```python
class Record:
    def __init__(self, key, value):
        self.key = key
        self.value = value
        self.sequence_number = next(SequenceNumberGenerator())
```

However, with this method, the generator is re-instantiated with every new record and thus, every record is assigned the
same sequence number: 0.
One way to solve the problem would have been to have a single generator instantiated at the top level (the `LsmStorage`
class) and passed down at every call of the `Record` class (and all intermediary classes), but that would have been
messy and error-prone.
Instead, I decided to use the [singleton pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern) to ensure that only
one instance of the generator was created and reused for every need.

I decided to create a [decorator](https://peps.python.org/pep-0318/) that would encapsulate the singleton.
A decorator is simply a function that is applied to the class or function that it "decorates" (`SequenceNumberGenerator`
in the example below), and that does it with a particular syntax: when `@decorator` is written above a class or
function, the `decorator` function is applied to that class or function. Therefore,
writing `@decorator; class Decorated` is equivalent to doing `decorator(Decorated)`.
Implementing the singleton pattern is relatively easy: I proceeded by creating a dictionary of class instances and, if
the class instantiated is already in the dictionary, I use it (thereby creating only a single instance).

Here is what I came up with:

```python
def singleton(cls):
    instances = {}

    def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
        if cls not in instances:
            instances[cls] = cls(*args, **kwargs)
        return instances[cls]

    return wrapper


@singleton
class SequenceNumberGenerator:
    def __init__(self, start=0):
        self.current = start

    def __iter__(self):
        return self

    def __next__(self):
        current = self.current
        self.current += 1
        return current
```

This worked well: if two generators are instantiated, their value keeps is monotonically increasing, as expected:

```python
def test_sequence_number_generator_is_a_singleton():
    # GIVEN
    generator1 = SequenceNumberGenerator()
    assert next(generator1) == 0
    assert next(generator1) == 1
    generator2 = SequenceNumberGenerator()

    # WHEN/THEN
    assert next(generator2) == 2
    assert next(generator1) == 3
```

I think I could definitely have stopped there.
However, I was a little troubled with this behavior for my tests: basically, since I made it a singleton, all my tests
used the same instance and thus, the exact sequence number for a given test would depend on the ordering of tests (if I
add one additional test that creates a record, then the values for all subsequent tests are shifted by 1).
I really want my tests to be independent of one another (mostly because it would not be very fun to have to update the
sequence number of the tests asserting it every time I added, deleted or modified another one).
Therefore, I thought of adding a `reset` method on my singleton that would be called before each test.

To do this, I needed to use a slightly more complex syntax: I wrapped the logic inside
a `SingletonWrapper` class inheriting from the decorated class (`SingleNumberGenerator`).
I also provided it with a `__new__` method to handle instantiation and with a `reset` method to handle resetting the
generator.
Hereunder is the updated implementation I came up with:

```python
def singleton(decorated_class):
    instances = {}

    class SingletonWrapper(decorated_class):
        def __new__(cls, *args, **kwargs):
            if decorated_class not in instances:
                instances[decorated_class] = super().__new__(decorated_class)
                instances[decorated_class].__init__(*args, **kwargs)
            return instances[decorated_class]

        @classmethod
        def reset(cls):
            if decorated_class in instances:
                del instances[decorated_class]

    return SingletonWrapper


@singleton
class SingleNumberGenerator:
    ...
```

In this code, `SingletonWrapper` inherits from `decorated_class`.
Since the `@singleton` decorator is applied to `SingleNumberGenerator`, `decorated_class` in this case corresponds
to `SingleNumberGenerator`.
In other words, when instantiating `SingleNumberGenerator`, we obtain a regular `SingleNumberGenerator` object
incremented with the `reset` method defined in the `SingletonWrapper` class.
The `reset` method simply deletes the instance from the dictionary of available instances.
As for the `__new__` method, it does the same as the previous implementation: namely returning the already existing
instance or creating a new one the first time.
When creating a new instance, it first calls the creator of the decorated class
(with `super().__new__(decorated_class)`) and then initialize the instance with the correct arguments
(with `instances[decorated_class].__init__(*args, **kwargs)`).

The behavior of the `reset` method can then be tested as follows:

```python
def test_sequence_number_generator_can_be_restarted():
    SequenceNumberGenerator.reset()
    # GIVEN
    generator1 = SequenceNumberGenerator()
    assert next(generator1) == 0
    assert next(generator1) == 1
    assert next(generator1) == 2

    # WHEN
    generator2 = SequenceNumberGenerator()
    SequenceNumberGenerator.reset()
    generator3 = SequenceNumberGenerator()

    # THEN
    assert next(generator1) == 3
    assert next(generator2) == 4
    assert next(generator3) == 0
```

As expected, `generator1` and `generator2` that were instantiated before the reset carry on incrementing, whereas
`generator3` which was instantiated after the reset start from 0.
Victory! 🎉 
