---
layout: post
title: "RC: W5 D5 — When to use `NotImplemented` and `NotImplementedError`"
date: 2024-03-15
tags: [databases, lsm]
group: recurse_center
---

Today I spent most of my day preparing a presentation on databases that I will give on Monday, so not much coding done.
So I thought I would share a small thing I learned this week to distinguish "not implemented" cases.

In the Python source code chunk I shared yesterday, after executing the comparison operation, there is a check testing
whether the result is `Py_NotImplemented`. This corresponds to cases where we `return NotImplemented` in Python.
There is also a `raise NotImplementedError` that is sometimes used, and I was a bit confused as to when to use one or
the other.
Here is what I figured:

- `NotImplemented` is a special value meant to indicate that the operation is not implemented with respect to the other
  type (as mentioned in [the docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/constants.html)). So it could be used when
  implementing comparison methods for example.
- `NotImplementedError` is an exception meant to be raised when a class is being developed and the method called has not
  been implemented yet, or to indicate that an abstract method from a base class is meant to be overridden
  by derived classes (as mentioned
  in [the docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#NotImplementedError)).

Here is a small snippet of code that should make the difference between the two clearer:

```python
class MyParentClass:
    def my_method(self):
        raise NotImplementedError("Subclasses must implement this method.")


class MyDerivedClass(MyParentClass):
    def my_method(self):
        print("MyDerivedClass implementation of my_method.")


class MyComparisonClass:
    def __eq__(self, other):
        if not isinstance(other, MyComparisonClass):
            return NotImplemented
        # comparison logic here
```

What is interesting about explicitly declaring the `return NotImplemented` is that it allows to prevent unintended
behaviors.
For example, let's suppose we have a class whose `__eq__` method operates on the `key` attribute but does not explcitly
state a `NotImplemented` case:

```python
class MyClass1:
    def __init__(self, key):
        self.key = key

    def __eq__(self, other):
        return self.key == other.key


class MyClass2:
    def __init__(self, key, value):
        self.key = key
        self.value = value

    def __eq__(self, other):
        return self.key == other.key and self.value == other.value
```

With this, executing `MyClass1(key="a") == MyClass2(key="a", value="a")` would indicate that the two objects are equal
(because they have the same `key`) without giving any warning.
By adding the `NotImplemented` case when the second object is of a different instance, we are warned that the comparison
being executed might not be what is intended – which is much better!


