---
layout: post
title: "RC: W9 D1 — Using event-driven patterns to rebuild the state from a manifest"
date: 2024-04-08
tags: [databases, lsm]
group: recurse_center
---


The SSTables in an LSM engine are organized into several levels.
This hierarchy of levels and the list of all SSTables that correspond to each is stored in the engine's state, in
memory only.
So what would happen if the engine shut down?
The SSTable files would still be present on disk, but there would be no way to know which belongs to each level any
longer.
To allow recovering the state at restart, LSM engines use a "manifest": it is a file that logs all the operations that
change the state.
With this log, the operations can be replayed and the state recreated.

In my own implementation, so far, I have two operations that change it:

1. The flush operation that writes a memtable to disk (thus creating an SSTable);
2. The compaction operation that compacts and merges SSTables of one level to SSTables of the next level.

So every time one of these two operations is performed, I need to log it into the manifest.
Later, when the system restarts, I will use the manifest to re-build the state.

Before implementing the code that would serialize events onto a manifest, I needed to design events that would capture
all the information needed to allow to rebuild the state correctly.
I paired with both [Emily](https://github.com/emilyvomacka) and [Benjamin](https://benjaminarnav.com/) to do this.
We wanted to write a function that would take a list of events and recreate the state from it.
The principle is to replay the events one by one and to update the state as we go.

One easy way to do this would be to rewrite the full state to disk every time one of these events occur, but this would
use a lot of disk space.
To do it more efficiently, we wanted to design the events to contain only the minimal amount of information required to
recreate it.

Flush events create a new SSTable on disk, and they will always be at level 0.
So we only need to record the created SSTable:

```python
class FlushEvent(Event):
    def __init__(self, sstable: SSTable):
        super().__init__()
        self.sstable = sstable
```

Compaction events are slightly more complex: they take `n` SSTables from a given level in input and recreate another set
of `m` compacted SSTables positioned at the next level. We thus need to record these three pieces of information (level,
input SSTables, output SSTables):

```python
class CompactionEvent(Event):
    def __init__(self,
                 input_sstables: list[SSTable],
                 output_sstables: list[SSTable],
                 level: int):
        super().__init__()
        self.input_sstables = input_sstables
        self.output_sstables = output_sstables
        self.level = level
```

Next, we implemented a method that takes a list of such events as input and recreates the state:

```python
from collections import deque


def reconstruct(self, nb_levels: int, events: list[Event]) -> LsmStorage:
    ss_tables_levels = [deque() for _ in range(nb_levels + 1)]

    for event in events:
        if isinstance(event, FlushEvent):
            ss_tables_levels[0].insert(0, event.sstable)
        if isinstance(event, CompactionEvent):
            level = event.level
            output_level = level + 1 if level < nb_levels else level
            for sstable in event.output_sstables:
                ss_tables_levels[output_level].insert(0, sstable)
            for sstable in event.input_sstables:
                ss_tables_levels[level].remove(sstable)

    store = LsmStorage()
    store.ss_tables = ss_tables_levels[0]
    store.ss_tables_levels = ss_tables_levels[1:]

    return store
```

This `reconstruct` method reads all events one by one and replays them to compute the list of SSTables at each level.
The only special case is that of the last level: if we compact at this level, output files go to the same level (not the
next one).

We are now able to recreate the state of the engine from a list of events. This is a great first step!
Now that we know how to design the events, the next step will be to serialize them to disk, so that they can be written
to and read from the manifest.
