---
layout: post
title: "RC: W7 D3 — `ModuleNotFoundError` shenanigans"
date: 2024-03-27
tags: [databases, lsm]
group: recurse_center
---

After implementing the bloom filter yesterday, [Laurent](https://ldirer.com/) thought about running a small script to
compute a bunch of statistics and build some intuition about the behavior of bloom filters.
So he wrote a script that imports the file containing our implementation, we put it in a `scripts` folder and
executed it.
And... instead of getting any statistics, we got the (common!) `ModuleNotFoundError` 😅.

Usually, when I get this error, I just add an `__init__.py` file in the module I am importing (`src` in this case) to
tell Python "Hey! This is a module" and I don't think anymore about it.
But this time it did not work and, instead of trying to find some workarounds, we decided we would really understand
what Python does.

So we created a minimal repository setup with the following structure:

```
my_project/
├───src/
│   ├───__init__.py
│   └───a.py
└───scripts/
    └───run.py
```

The `src/a.py` file contains:

```python
print("in file", __file__)
```

And the `scripts/run.py` file contains:

```python
import sys

print("sys.path", sys.path)

import src.a

print("Finished executing the script!")
```

With this, when we execute `python scripts/run.py`, we get a `ModuleNotFoundError`.
By printing the content of `sys.path`, we get to see that there are a bunch of paths corresponding to the python
installation and, more interestingly, one corresponding to the `scripts` folder (`'/Users/maud/my_project/scripts'`).
That's interesting because that is exactly why the `src` module cannot be found: it is located
in `'/Users/maud/my_project/` and this path has not been added to `sys.path`.
What happens precisely is that Python adds the path to the directory containing the file that is being executed
in `sys.path` (as mentioned in the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/using/cmdline.html#cmdoption-m:~:text=If%20the%20script%20name%20refers%20directly%20to%20a%20Python%20file%2C%20the%20directory%20containing%20that%20file%20is%20added%20to%20the%20start%20of%20sys.path%2C%20and%20the%20file%20is%20executed%20as%20the%20__main__%20module)).
So moving the script to the root would solve the problem, but no one really wants to do this because files get
completely disorganized.

There are several workarounds to avoid this:

- Run the script as a module by executing `python -m scripts.run`. As mentioned in
  the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/using/cmdline.html#cmdoption-m), the current directory gets added to
  `sys.path`. That works, but is a bit cumbersome because there is no autocompletion in the terminal
  for `scripts.run` by default.
- Manually append the path to the root directory at the beginning of each script file `sys.path.append(/path/to/root/)`.
  This also works, but it is very tedious to add this in every single script file.
- Add the current directory to `sys.path` from the CLI before executing the
  script (`export PYTHONPATH=: ; python scripts/run.py`). This can be automated to avoid having to add it every time on
  one's particular machine, but when sharing the repo and giving instructions to execute a script, users will get into
  the same trouble.

Laurent figured that Python uses "path configuration files" that are located in the `site-packages` folder and having
a `.pth` extension.
As mentioned in the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/site.html), the content of those files is added
to `sys.path`.
So if we add the path to the root directory in it, it's all solved.

We can do this easily by adding a small script that does this:

```python
import os, site, pathlib

# Define path to pth file
pth_filename = f"{pathlib.Path(__file__).stem}.pth"
site_packages_directory = site.getsitepackages()[0]
pth_file_path = os.path.join(site_packages_directory, pth_filename)

# Add root directory to pth file
root_directory = os.path.abspath(os.path.dirname(__file__))
with open(pth_file_path, 'w') as f:
    f.write(root_directory + '\n')

print(f"Added '{root_directory}' to '{pth_file_path}'.")
```

After executing this setup script, the `.pth` is configured correctly, and the trouble with importing modules is gone
forever.

I created a small repo with the correct minimal
setup [here](https://github.com/MaudGautier/module-not-found-shenanigans).

