---
layout: post
title: "RC: W4 D1 — Designing the in-memory component of my LSM storage engine"
date: 2024-03-04
categories: recurse_center, DMBS, storage_engine, LSM
---

Today, I started designing at a high-level what the in-memory component ("memtable") of my LSM storage engine would look
like.

LSM-based storage engines usually contain a cascade of memtables: only one is active (the one in which key-value pairs
are written) and the others are immutable and will be flushed to disk at some point.
This design can be summed up with the drawing hereunder:

```text
                                                       Key-value pair
                                                       
                                                             |
                                                             | Write
                                                             |
                                                             V
     +------------+         +------------+    Freeze   +------------+
     | Memtable n |   ...   | Memtable 1 |  <--------  | Memtable 0 |
     +------------+         +------------+             +------------+
           |
           | Flush to disk
           |
           V
      +---------+   +---------+       +---------+
      | SSTable |   | SSTable |  ...  | SSTable |
      +---------+   +---------+       +---------+
```

So far, I have implemented a red-black tree that works for insertions and lookups.
This will be the data structure for my memtables, but other data structures could have worked as well, such
as [AVL trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AVL_tree) or [skip lists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skip_list).
(After having implemented my red-black tree, I discovered that _real_ systems in production actually use skip lists...
😅. I will keep mine as a red-black tree, and might change this to a skip list later if I have time!)
As far as I know, it doesn't seem to matter much which data structure we choose, as long as it allows to keep the data
sorted and allows for inserts and lookups in logarithmic time.

Here are the other objects that I will be using:

- A `Record` class that handles encoding and decoding of a given key-value item, so that they can be stored on disk
  and decoded before being returned to the client
- A `MemTable` class that is a wrapper around RedBlackTrees (or any other chosen data structure to keep records in
  memory). It delegates storage and sorting to the RedBlackTree class, but should handle other operations such as
  recording the size of the memtable, and calls to the Record class to encode/decode data before it is passed to the
  RedBlackTree.
- A `LsmStorage` class that handles the all high-level operations on both the in-memory and disk components. It
  deals with rotations of memtables (freezing) and flushing memtables to disk.

Today, I dealt with record encoding and decoding in the `Record` class.
Tomorrow, I will start digging into the "freezing" of memtables!


