---
layout: post
title: "RC: W4 D2 — Introducing locks to control concurrency"
date: 2024-03-05
categories: recurse_center, DMBS, storage_engine, LSM
group: recurse_center
---


In order to make storage engines performant, they are usually designed to be able to serve concurrent requests.
However, it is also essential that no data is corrupted or partially written, which may happen for example if two write
requests conflict and are handled concurrently.

To control concurrency, I will need to use locks.
As far as my research and design goes, it seems that I will need two distinct kinds of locking mechanisms:

1. Mutexes
2. Read-write locks

A **mutex** is a mutual exclusive lock. It means that only one thread can have access to the resource being protected at
a time, to the exclusion of all others.

A **read-write lock** allows for some level of concurrency: multiple threads may read the protected resource at the same
time, but if one needs to write to it, it will need to be granted access to the exclusion of all others.
In other words:

- There can be at most one thread writing to the protected resource — if that is the case, then no thread can read. This
  means that, to acquire the `write_lock`, we must wait for all readers to be finished, and to acquire the `read_lock`,
  we must wait for the writer (if any) to be finished.
- There can be multiple readers (with no writer)

In Python, we can implement these two locking mechanisms with the `threading` package.
The `threading.Lock` object is already a mutex: only one thread may hold this lock at a given time.
Thus, there is virtually nothing to do: I will just define a `Mutex` class that is a wrapper around this object (for
readability purposes).
As for the read-write lock, we can implement it by building on top of the `threading.Lock` object as follows:

```python
import threading
from contextlib import contextmanager


class Mutex(threading.Lock):
    pass


class ReadWriteLock:
    def __init__(self):
        self.lock = threading.Lock()
        self.readers = 0
        self.writers = 0
        self.write_requests = 0
        self.condition = threading.Condition(self.lock)

    @contextmanager
    def read(self):
        with self.condition:
            while self.writers > 0 or self.write_requests > 0:
                self.condition.wait()
            self.readers += 1
        yield
        with self.condition:
            self.readers -= 1
            if self.readers == 0:
                self.condition.notify_all()

    @contextmanager
    def write(self):
        with self.condition:
            self.write_requests += 1
            while self.readers > 0 or self.writers > 0:
                self.condition.wait()
            self.write_requests -= 1
            self.writers += 1
        yield
        with self.condition:
            self.writers -= 1
            self.condition.notify_all()
```

With this implementation, when a thread wants to write (`self.write()`), it must wait until there is no reader or writer
(`while self.readers > 0 or self.writers > 0: self.condition.wait()`).
Conversely, when a thread wants to read (`self.read()`), it must wait until there is no current writer or writer waiting
(`while self.writers > 0 or self.write_requests > 0: self.condition.wait()`).

Once the read or write operation is finished and conditions are met (no remaining readers in the case of a read
operation), all waiting threads are notified (`self.condition.notify_all()`). Thus awakened, they can try to acquire the
lock again and proceed.

One last thing: the use of the `@contextmanager` from `contextlib` allows to call the `.read()` and `.write()`
methods in a `with` statement. Indeed, it creates a generator, and the code that is before the `yield` statement is
executed when entering the context block, while the code that is after the `yield` statement is executing upon exiting
the context block (whether it was exited normally or with an exception).

That's it for today. Tomorrow, I will use those to handle the "freeze" operation on my memtables.

